The Great Gatsby, by Scott Fitzgerald


Summary Overview:

Set in Jazz Age New York, it tells the tragic story of Jay Gatsby, a self-made millionaire, and his pursuit of Daisy Buchanan, a wealthy young woman whom he loved in his youth. The book is narrated by Nick Carraway, who recounts the events of the summer of 1922, after he takes a house in the fictional village of West Egg on Long Island. There he lives among the newly rich, while across the water, in the more refined village of East Egg, live his cousin Daisy and her brutish wealthy husband, Tom Buchanan. As the summer progresses, Nick is finally invited to attend one of the dazzling parties held by Jay Gatsby, his neighbour. At Gatsby’s request, Nick invites Daisy to his house, where she and Gatsby meet again and renew their relationship. Tom soon becomes aware of the affair and confronts Gatsby at the Plaza Hotel. Daisy tries to calm them down, but Gatsby insists that he and Daisy have always been in love and that she has never loved Tom. As the fight escalates, Tom reveals what he had learned from an investigation into Gatsby’s affairs—that he had earned his money by selling illegal alcohol. Gatsby tries to deny it, but Daisy has lost her resolve to leave her husband, and Gatsby’s cause seems hopeless. Gatsby and Daisy leave together in Gatsby’s car, with Daisy driving. On the road she hits and kills Myrtle Wilson, Tom’s mistress, though her identity is unknown to Daisy, who knew only that Tom was having an affair. Terrified, Daisy continues driving, but the car is seen by witnesses. The next afternoon George Wilson, Myrtle’s widower, arrives in East Egg, where Tom tells him that it was Gatsby who killed his wife. Wilson goes to Gatsby’s house, where he shoots Gatsby and then himself. Afterward the Buchanans leave Long Island, and Nick arranges Gatsby’s funeral.


Chapter 1 Outline:
Chapter 1:
•	Nick Carraway, the protagonist and narrator, starts The Great Gatsby by sharing a lesson his dad taught him: not to judge others, as most haven't had the privileges and opportunities he's had.
o	He states that by following this advice, he's developed into someone who is tolerant and forgiving and avoids forming hasty opinions.
•	Nick states that he has disdain for all that Gatsby represented, yet he does not pass judgment on him.
o	He describes Gatsby as a person with a "gorgeous" persona and a seemingly endless sense of optimism.
	Nick thinks of him as someone who was defeated by the "foul dust" that destroyed his aspirations.
•	It's the summer of 1922, and Nick—a graduate of Yale University—has recently come back from serving in World War I.
•	Feeling restless in his hometown of Minnesota (where his family has lived for three generations), he decides to move to New York.
•	Nick plans to pursue a career as a bond salesman, a vocation most of his acquaintances have also chosen.
o	He is hoping to experience the thrill and potential permeating the country in the early 1920s.
o	Nick remarks that relocating to New York provided a unique opportunity for him and others to discover or recreate themselves.
•	Nick rents a house in West Egg, a Long Island suburb situated across a bay from East Egg.
o	He notes that the two communities differ greatly, except for the fact that they're the same size and shape.
	West Egg is inhabited by the "new rich"—those who have recently acquired their wealth and lack the social connections and cultural sophistication to be accepted in the circles of the "old money" families of East Egg.
•	The "new rich" of West Egg have a reputation for their ostentatious displays of wealth, which the old money families of East Egg find unpleasant.
o	One example is Gatsby's enormous mansion, which is right next to the small house that Nick rents in West Egg.
	Gatsby's property is a huge copy of a French hotel, decorated with ivy and surrounded by 40 acres of immaculate lawns and gardens.
o	Nick only knows Gatsby's name and the fact that he lives in this large house.
•	Nick rents his small house in West Egg, but he has a number of social connections in East Egg.
o	One day, he travels to East Egg to have dinner with his cousin Daisy and her husband Tom, who—like Nick—went to Yale.
o	Upon Nick's arrival, Tom is wearing riding clothes, and he behaves arrogantly and haughtily as he talks to Nick.
	Tom’s behavior reminds Nick of the fact that Tom was widely disliked at Yale.
	Nick muses that Tom's demeanor and stature have not changed much since his college days.
•	Nick is introduced to Jordan Baker, a young and attractive golfer, at dinner.
o	She has an air of constant boredom about her.
•	Tom quickly begins a speech about civilization's collapse, which he learned about in a book called The Rise of the Colored Empires.
o	He claims that the Nordic race, to which he belongs, created civilization and that it's now in danger due to other, lesser races becoming more powerful.
o	He insists that everyone read the book.
	Daisy jokingly brushes off his advice.
•	Tom then exits the room to take a phone call, with Daisy chasing swiftly behind.
o	Jordan informs Nick that the call must be from Tom's mistress.
	The rest of the evening is uncomfortable.
o	As Nick is taking his leave, Tom and Daisy urge him to start a relationship with Jordan.
•	Returning home from dinner, Nick spots Jay Gatsby standing on his lawn and gazing out over the Long Island Sound.
o	He contemplates calling out to the man to say hello, but he stops when he sees Gatsby stretching out his arms towards the opposite side of the water.
	All Nick can see across the water is a small green light flickering at the end of a dock.


Chapter 2 Summary:
•	Nick describes a desolate area between West Egg and New York City.
o	He calls it a "Valley of Ashes," because it's where ashes from the city are dumped.
o	This grim landscape is home to destitute men and a billboard of an eye doctor who's no longer in business.
o	The billboard shows two huge spectacled eyes that seem to watch over the valley.
	These are the eyes of Doctor T.J. Eckleburg, which look out over everything in the area.
•	Tom and Nick take the train from Long Island to the city one day, and Tom gets off at a stop in the Valley of Ashes.
o	He invites Nick to come with him, and they make their way to George Wilson's auto garage.
	Wilson is handsome, but downtrodden, and has ashes in his hair.
	Meanwhile, his wife Myrtle—whom Nick learns is Tom's mistress—looks vibrant and sensual.
o	Tom talks to Wilson about selling a car and, when Wilson leaves to grab some chairs, Tom quietly tells Myrtle to meet them at the train station later.
•	Tom, Myrtle, and Nick go to Tom's apartment in the city—the apartment he rents in order to have his affair.
o	Catherine, Myrtle's sister, soon arrives, followed by another couple.
o	All of them become intoxicated, even Nick, who comments that it's only the second time he has been inebriated.
•	The conversation soon drifts to Nick's neighbor Gatsby.
o	Catherine admits she's scared of him, as rumor has it he is related to Kaiser Wilhelm.
o	The group speculates that Gatsby is involved in some suspicious dealings.
•	Myrtle gets rip-roaring drunk and becomes louder and louder.
o	She starts to talk about Daisy.
o	Tom cautions Myrtle not to use Daisy's name, but she mocks him by chanting her name.
	He strikes Myrtle in the face, breaking her nose.
	Following this incident, the gathering comes to a close and Nick heads back to his place by train.


Chapter 3:
